boarding on the. Okay. So yeah, figuring it out. Yes. Okay.
All right. Well, Virginia, thank you so much for taking the
time. I have, I have so many questions, so many exciting
things. Because for me, personally, Blizzard has been my
life since I was a kid. And I look at it as one of the oldest
institutions in video games, especially in America. Sure.
And just the the breadth and size and all the eras and arcs
that they've been on develops a lot of material to archive.
Correct. And so I'm going to just start with some really simple
questions. Like, what was the motivation for starting the
Blizzard archive? Do you have any information? I do. I do.
You know, comparison and be like, what can I say? So our CEO at
the time, or I was at Pixar and saw their program, saw their
museum and library and archive and was like, Oh, of course, we
need that we need something like this, right? Yeah. And they
started it early 90s. Actually, let me pull up my cheat sheet
because I don't want to tell you the wrong thing.
The archive started in the early 90s. Yes. So we're really
old. Okay. So yeah, I didn't even know it existed two weeks
ago. I that's because of how kind of video games are very
simple. And say this is why any media like that. I apologize.
I misspoke. All right. It was established in 91. That's
the early 90s that I'm pulling from. But it the archive
itself, the company has established 91, the archive itself
was established in 2006. So that does make sense. Because
that's right around right before Wrath of the Lich King, I
think. So the World of Warcraft stuff. Yeah. So let's say 1994 was
the Warcraft works in humans. And they like already by night,
like after works in humans, I found an early PowerPoint from one
of our first managers of this program, they're like pitching the
archive and like, what do we do all this stuff? There's drawings,
there's original art, you know, everyone, you know, as you know,
the compelling part about games is it really comes back to people
and is this in creativity? And there's all this amazing raw
material. It's like, what do we do that?
Yeah, it manages it. But then came the really practical need on
the digital side of, you know, game companies iterate game
companies make assets that go into the game, but then they go
out into the world and books, they go out into, you know,
merch, they go out into all these like unknown, they have their own
lifecycle right outside the game. So so then, you know, obviously,
that has to be captured and how you do that and how do you do that
when you're not embedded in a team? So these are age old questions
this team has been trying to solve since 2000. Those are exactly
the question. You're already asking the questions that I
think about too. Because when I think about how large a video game
company is, and how many different types of media they work
with, all of my research is constantly is like, there's so
much stuff. There's a lot of stuff and the code bases to
honestly, like history details, our digital archive is a history
lesson in the evolution of technology, there are so many
file types, a lot of them proprietary, right, like made up
by the game specific game engine. So that's a challenge to is
like keeping the, you know, the file, like, is it considered
preserved if it's saved, or is it preserved if it if you can
render it, right? And Lizzer, that's, these are also really
fun questions. Yeah. So like even defining what preservation
means has been like a fun intellectual challenge, you know,
does that show up in the policy at all? Like what what is how does
Blizzard develop that is not reflected in the policies? So
yeah, this team has been quite small for some time, and is
really professionalizing and the way policy, which is like
why Leah pointed you to me, I've been here almost four years.
And since I've come, I've been like, we gotta have the poll,
you know, we gotta have the policy. It helps us, it protects
our relationships, because it's like, we're not saying no to
you per se, we're saying no, this, you know, like it protects
everyone, it helps ensure that we're all on the same page. And
then it, it, you know, we are not ourselves, this was this
sort of interesting. We are stewards, right? So we are not
making policy about anything we collect, we are proposing
policy, we are working with leadership to enact that
policy, but we are not out here creating policy, just because
we feel like it. Yeah, you know what I mean? Or just because we
say so, because we, and that's an interesting relationship is
we're stewards, we can't enforce anything. And so there is no
top down mandate to archive with us. There's no policy. You
have to archive. Yes. Wow. And as far as I know, not just not
just game archives, most business archives, that is just
like the challenge. Now, there might be things like
compliance. That's a little different. But in terms of like a
creative production oriented organization, there's no, there's
no policy, right? So it's our job to build relationships and
convince people to archive with us. Okay, so that's part of like
the librarianship part of archivism is that you are doing
the advocate advocacy yourself. Yeah. And it's
kind of it's constant. It's always online item. It's always a
goal. It never goes good. That was actually my questions. We're
never done advocating. There's always changes in leadership.
Yeah, there's changes in leadership. People come in and out
for whatever reason, there's attrition. And so we are we do
our best to build relationships. And then we do our best to find
a adjustable way. So like, tell people about our mission to
get out there. We just had a really cool and external that
yes, you're telling everybody. Correct. That's
internal and I start every year we develop. Yeah, every year we
kind of create goals. And so I can share this with you. This is
like aligned with a strategic plan of some sort or something
that you develop. Yeah. So we make a strategic plan. Yeah. So
for example, we every year we try to find two organizations and
we do like an exchange where we go and we tour their organization
they come into our organization. So we've done that like with
Disney. Yeah, let me go into my Oh, really? Okay. Yeah, that makes
so much sense. Yeah, there aren't, you know, a ton of game
archives out there quite yet. So we're just trying to pick
apart and it's so funny that you've if you all started in the
2000s, this is very 2000s era of of archivism that I'm kind of
hearing as opposed to right now, there's a very large fervor
in video games about preservation specifically and yeah, just
trying to like hold on to it capture as much as you possibly
can in like a Pokeball, even though it's not really how this
works. Yeah, preservation is a part of our program. Yeah, I
have a little deck I can like scroll through and kind of show
you how we work. If you're interested. Absolutely. Let me
just get into it. And I'm trying to share here. Can you? Does it
work? Is there a thing I have to do? Yeah. Nope. Can you see my
screen? Nope, I cannot see it yet. Oh, there it is. Okay. All
right. So I'm going to scroll through this real quick, but you
know, this is the background. It says started screen share. Oh,
there it is. Okay. I'm not going to get into the background
here. Because we just whenever that we have our physical archive
right? And this I really like this slide. It's like this is
what we try to show off. Yeah, it shows you the iteration, right?
So it's it's like, you know, an artist might come up with like a
sketch, right? But then it gets put into the game, it gets put into
cinematic, it gets turned into a prop. Then it got put into the
I don't know if you're able to see this. Oh, I can. Okay. So
that got yeah, that got turned into like a, like a little
commercial. So we have original sketches, you know, we have
paintings, then things get commissioned to get into painting.
So that's like one example. And we have 30 years of collected
assets. And so we're working at 35th anniversary. We it'll be
public at the end of the month. But there's a project coming now
where they had a 30 foot long 35 foot long table. And they it's
like a visual timeline told with the archive. It's so cool. It
is so cool. I like I feel like I'm going to say too much. So I'm
going to cut myself off. But it is so cool. And it's it's
really a gift to us because it's like, this is why archives,
right? This is what we can tell a story with this stuff. And the
challenge of a physical archives and something like Blizzard. This
is everything's born digital, right? Like where most things
are born digital. But we do saw props. They do commission
paintings. We do have all this cool stuff to draw from to
illustrate our rich history. And one reason like that we love to
like meet with Disney is hearing their story and how they got
started and what they came from. It's like we aspire to be
there with our physical archives. When they hear our story and
where we are with our digital archives, we aspire to be where
y'all are with your digital archives. So there's a lot of
like extra juice exchange. Our library is really like a
cultural hub. It's a place that people come to and guess come
on campus. If you ever want to come on campus, we could of
course really put my questions. Yeah, it's on the
tour. It's amazing. It has a lot of, you know, like,
gosh, what does it have? It has like your typical coding stuff
there that's like there for support and part of our budget,
our collection budget is there for any sort of like
JavaScript books, right? All the programming books, the
technical learning, but then we're also there to inspire. We
have a lot of game art that's like based on old master
paintings. So we have a lot of like art books. We have a lot
of game development that is environments that are based on
like different worlds, world building, we have source art
for that. So we try to collect really broadly and get a lot
of input from everyone and our. I don't know if I can let's see
this. I'm hearing that you are you are connecting with not
only people across all of Blizzard, which is a huge
organization, but also external outside of it. You said I saw
a little line down there that says 18 to 20 bookings a month.
Yeah. And does that include? Is that include like public book
or semi public bookings or it's not as much public? It's
definitely not. No, I like we can have that internal or is that
yeah, specifically for other corporations. Yeah, the bookings
are internal. So if you see like developer updates, a lot of
times they'll be sold in the library. So that's what this
picture is. Okay, like also you're used as a as a film
spot to yes, so they book us for what's important. That's so
funny because we always talk about how libraries are, you
know, visual spaces first. Yeah, it's really a community hub
for. Yeah, for the folks on campus. So it's still a third
space. Don't have a magic the gathering magic the gathering
night, right? They have game nights. Teams, we have a big
game table in there with tons of board games. Teams will go in
there and book games. We had our holiday party in there. We
did our elephant white elephant charming. Yes, it is
charming. And our librarian who I hope you'll get the pleasure
meeting. They are just extremely innovative. Those are all
things that those are things I don't think other like other
game companies would even think about when they think about
like, Oh, what if we had an archive or what if you had a
library of some sort? It's like, well, you're building a space
that will be a net gain for all of your employees, not just
information wise, but just spiritually. Yeah, yeah, I mean,
I don't want to say it. But if you want to say yes, it is the
soul, right? It's this is a creative soul. It's a heartbeat.
It's any. We try to, for example, we have like employee
networks, where like Black History Month women's history
month. Pride, we we have exhibits related to holidays. So we
try to really celebrate our culture at Blizzard, which includes
a lot of diversity, or we try to be very inclusive. So it's
a safe place, right? I'm so excited because all of that stuff
just sounds like normal librarianship. Yes, it's normal
librarians. Part of my studies is in special librarianship. And
part of that is finding what the edges are. But also, what are
the inclusions? Yeah, so I can show you I brought this. Can you
see this, by the way? Wow, yes. Okay, so this is our
collection scope and policies. Yeah, yes, this is for you.
This is the physical archives. Let me get into I tried to bring
them all up. They're all separated out because our program
is for the library. Okay. So this shows, you know, we have our
books, we have our ebooks, we have audio books, and then we get
into our policy. I love how this is positioned for for
employees to understand really easily what y'all are. Yeah,
yeah, and you know, libraries are under a lot of scrutiny
right now. So it was really important for us to get something
like this out there about our statement of intellectual
freedom. And we have, you know, we have all kinds of content,
we try to be able to check out links to we do. Yeah, we are
using, we just migrated from a very, very expensive,
complicated program that made it where we couldn't function
without a lot of help.
How long was the migration process that's it? It probably
took about three months. Wow. Yeah, we so we are in now we're
using CoHA KOHA, which is an open source. You've probably
heard of that. Oh, interesting. Yeah, so this is our new,
like library portal. See if it'll go there. And this
what's cool about it is people, if they can't find what they
need, they can actually go in and make a request. So that's we
really encourage requests. We want the collect the collection
is as you know, as library student, right, constantly a
reflection of our culture of our interests of our focus. And so
it's like a living collection that's living and reflecting the
culture at at present, you know, yep. So yeah, we've had a
really easy time with it. Our team has two engineers, which is
so amazing. And that's amazing. Yeah. Since I've been here, it's
been just essential for us to be able to do what we do. You
have two engineers, and you have. Yes, we have two engineers,
mainly at least our digital archivist, we have a librarian.
And then I'll show you this our physical archive, which I did
show you. So let me show you the physical archive policy. Let's
see. Oh, yeah, that's going to have just so many other things
in there. But yeah, what what's the biggest thing that you have?
Oh, gosh, we always talk about space in the library. Yeah, so
we do, you know, you're gonna hear us from everyone, right, you
have to have a scope, you can't just like put it all out there.
Um, yeah, we get, yeah, we get a lot of stuff. Um,
there's a lot of things that are developed just for teams,
like celebrations. Um, this is two weeks after. Okay. Yeah,
so this is interesting. We're used a lot, but we're small.
People don't realize how small we are. So, I mean, I know you
hear eight people, you think that's too many? That's a lot. No,
it's that we have one physical archivist, right? And she is
heavily heavily used. So, um, we have, we have put this out there
to try to be like, okay, guys, like, we're gonna need, um, we're
gonna need you to give us a little lead time. But this
example of like, we try to highlight sort of like, what do
you mean archives? Like game companies don't understand, right?
So we really go in, we can use this to educate, like, go into,
like, if we're in a meeting and people are like, why is this
takes a long way? This goes through like all of our policy,
right, of what we do. And, um, we try to make it picture heavy.
Because people like pictures. Yup. Yup. Grass pictures. Right.
Yeah. So, um, yeah, we include a lot of pictures so people can
kind of see like what the heck that means. Can I cancel that?
Okay. Um, yeah. So that gives you an insight into sort of the
stuff we have. I didn't think I was gonna be looking at a dragon
today. Okay. Yeah, there's all I can't. I'm really excited to
invite you to go this. Yeah. Oh, yeah. I'm so sick. I'm just
I'm gleeful. Awesome. Um, okay. So that's physical. And then
let me go back over here and pull this guy over. So, so yeah,
we have a physical archive, our library. And then we actually
have a curator. She has been with us for almost 20 years. She's
amazing. Oh, wow. Being a bishop. Oh my god. Okay. So you
have a curator who has been there for a span that yeah,
or it's all of the different organizations. Yeah, she's
incredible. Um, so this is it's a little hard to see. Um, but we
have a museum on campus. And that's really like, again, this is
we're serving our community, our arguing community. So it's not
as much about the public is about our community, our blizzard
employees. Yup. Um, which your community is like tens of
thousands of people, thousands and it's a library's worth of
people. What's interesting is a lot of folks have never seen
their artwork printed out. And Dana is a freaking pro. Like, it's
any time I can print out an artist artwork. Yeah. These
exhibits, she makes her stunning. She also is in charge. We do
conservation, of course, a preservation for all of our
statues. And as you know, they require, you know, a lot of
policy around them. We have to make sure that they're handled
correctly, properly transported. You know, there's insurance, we
do registration and, you know, there's a whole part of the
loans. Yup. Um, I'm in, I'm in Seattle. And so I've been to the
museum of popular art. Oh, cool. Which features blizzards
artwork. I need to get up there, which is how I figured there
has to be some kind of a force that helps connect those
together. But it was also this is a part of the museum. The
fantasy section has been there for a decade and a half. And it's
seeing wear and tear. And so I'm like, sometimes a lot of the
companies that are being featured there are just gone. Yeah. We
never know. Things are at. It's a lot going on right now. A lot
of organizing in the world. I won't say more. But yeah, getting
to see video game assets in a formal museum is just, it
yeah, it's cool. Yeah, it really is. So she, we just did a huge
celebration on campus last week. She just did a new exhibit on
topic was world building and it featured all of our IPs as well
as like our cinematics and our audio and like what goes into
building a world and like how characters are developed in it
delved into her history is really exciting. And she's just, she's
amazing. And it's really what ties everything together, right?
Like we feature some books on world building in the exhibition.
We have this is like world building presentation for for who
for our employees. Yeah. So we had about Oh, so it's from your
perspective and you get an interface with your employees
with. Yeah, 300 people from campus game. It was really fun.
Oh, yeah. And they get to, you know, they get to come together
and be celebrated and celebrate their hard work and see it
presented in a format that usually in a kind of historical
context, like this is we're building on something here. So it
was really special.
Have you gotten to see because there has been a lot of pressure
on libraries and your archives do kind of fall into this. Yeah.
Have you seen that counter reaction where just more people are
coming in to be like, how can I help or how can I use your
services more? Um, no. Yeah, there has been.
Yeah, I haven't seen the reflection on what's going in the
world on in the world with libraries in the library. So we
understandable. Of course, people love it.
Use it requests things from it. And we, of course, keep the stats
and we report out on our stats. I was going to ask like, what do
you capture those kinds of information fields? Yeah, we
have they give you five star ratings or anything. Yeah, it's
really important. Um, as you know, it's vital, especially I
think for special libraries. It's the first thing to chop. Um,
and because of that, we keep that budget quite low. Um, we
wish we could question I had because there's a, there's a
conflict here, right? Where your corporation that's all about
making the number go really, really up. Yeah, but your
library or your archive that wants to make sure that they're not
seen as like, you know, taking up too much room, too much space.
Yeah, where's the ROI? Yeah. You also don't want to get like
stuck in the situation where the organization says, Oh, well,
you're only this much. We'll just ask because that's what we see in
the, you know, federal side on the federal side that libraries are
being cut for because they're so small. It's public now, but
Microsoft just cut their library and we're owned by Microsoft, right?
That's that was what prompted me even writing the question down was
I saw they had like eight librarians, so they invested heavily in their
library as opposed to their archive, which is interesting.
I think they're now trying to catch up. That's like, I shouldn't be saying
that in record. That's my perspective. From what I mean, from what little I
know. That's the little I know too. Yeah. Yeah, but yeah, they did.
They cut it, um, that they had, you know, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a, a,
they had, you know, a very, a very pricey.
Um, OPEC, they had a very pricey, um, amount of subscriptions.
And so that's what's tough. It's like they were serving their community that needed
it. Um, we are trying to keep our operation, you know, low,
streamlined mean, lean to mean. Exactly. Right. Um, as lean and mean as we can.
Um, we would love to expand and to have more of like a lab and stuff where we
could play preserved games, but that's like at the dream, you know, that
we're right. Yeah. How do you, are you, is there any functionality or services
that you provide where it's like, uh, providing games or like those kinds of
inspirational materials to teams if they need it? Yeah. We have, we have a whole
host of games. Um, and so that way your teams can keep up with what's going on
around. Yeah. But we don't have a place where they could play it in and have more
of that community feel. So we would, we would love to have something like that.
Um, we'll see. That would be amazing. Yeah.
I know. That's also a lot of space and that's. Yeah.
That's what I don't want thought is like, yeah. Yeah. So everything we do has to be
very carefully considered carefully weighed into, you know, the zeitgeist of
what's happening with, um, you know, we always, one thing that I love about
this company, they're very clear about what the goals are and that our goals
need to ladder up to theirs, right? So it's very clear like we're at what
direction we're heading and we always need to make sure that we're, what
we're doing reflects that. Um, yeah. And the digital archive, um, we try to
be really proactive and I'll get into that. Um, but we also will try to promote
this idea that the digital asset has a life cycle that is, um, always, it's all,
it never ends, right? It's always somewhere in the cycle. Um, so.
And as your games never end either, like, they're always in.
We will iterate. It's not a question of if we will. So, um, yeah.
Yeah. So these are the tools that are, um, engineer support. Um, but most, uh,
most of their time goes into helping us develop and support and open source tool
that we call Bart's and it basically, it allows us to, um, provide access to
images to models, um, that are in development.
That's exciting to hear that these are open source tools that yes, because that's
so much easier to expand on if other, um, yes, and we can work if we need to,
if we need to work from the vendor, we will. Um, but yeah, we push this tool as,
as far as we can and we're really excited about it. Um, but what's cool about it is
that developers are using it as they. I see those fields. I see it. Yeah. That's
good. So they are uploading. Thank you. So they upload.
Into the tool, the user for our reviews that has an annotation feature has
comments and then, um, then we have it, right? And then we have all the correct
metadata and we have the creator. So there's a lot of automaticity built.
At this metadata and it's going to have your name on it. If you're in this
group, it's going to get this metadata and then we are using AI to apply like
accessibility tags. Um, so that might not be like the character, but it'll
describe what you're seeing. It just helps make things more findable. Um,
because what we're running into is the, the purpose of the tool is not archiving.
The purpose of the tool is for them to get their stuff out there and share as
much as possible. And we are doing everything we can to quietly archive
from it in the background, but make it as frictionless and easy for them to
use as possible. Uh huh. Um, so yeah, that sort of, so then we have our,
cause you are being, you're being used as a hosting platform. Yeah. So that
they can put them there and have a link that they can. Yeah. And it has an API
and our goal now that it's built out and people are in it is for integrating
with pipelines. Um, integrating with the game engine, integrating with whatever,
all the teams and all the sub teams use this tool differently, which is really
easy. Wow. So your archives are directly connected to the pipeline. Yeah.
The design pipeline. That's amazing. I, I would have never thought I would have
like any guests I would have made. I'd be like, yeah, there's no way that archives
can. Yeah. Yeah. We're, we feel privileged and this has been a huge push.
Oh, that makes things so much easier. It makes me feel. Yeah. Yeah.
But those are the considerations that would have to be made if a large
development team wanted to have an archive is where does that part go in
and how does that help add a bunch of value to all the teams? Yeah. And it's not like,
um, it's, this is, this has been a huge pivot right from how we were operating
before. It was like collected when it's done. And then when I started,
we had, um, 5 million assets and 20% metadata. Yeah. This is a big shift. Uh,
and I would not say we're arrived, but we've made a lot of headway.
I'm really proud of where we end up. The volume of that is going to necessitate
some AI usage. Um, does that, has that been useful? Has that been, um, accurate?
And we do. Yes. And we have our policy on AI. Um, the main thing that,
like we are using it. Absolutely. We use it for like, um,
you know, accessibility tags, but we also using it to find like images,
which is really cool. So you can, if you're like, how this image,
can I find the other ones like it? You just upload the image and we'll find
everything just like it, um, which is so, so helpful.
People find stuff from online all the time. And we can be like, no,
that's not actually Blizzard. That's the fan art. You know, it helps us.
Yeah. Oh my God. You're right. I didn't even think about how. Yeah.
And oh my gosh. So sometimes as you know,
or maybe you don't probably do though, like fans will be hired.
Yes. Right. And so then I grew up in that generation.
I was in high school and like my best friend, she and I were like, we're going to go
play the Blizzard. And that was just a fond memory that we had play
Gravelich King together and be like, let's go do this. We love you. Yeah.
So fans would be making the art. Let me just mess this with my friend.
I'm running late. Um, we're fine. We can, we can. Okay. Okay.
Okay.
I'm just having a wonderful time.
Awesome. Um, is it okay if we have like, yeah, we can have,
yeah, we can have a little bit more. Um, so this is our engineers are just very
awesome, very busy. We're so lucky to have them. And then. Oh, you were saying that,
you hired fans who? Yeah. Well, Blizzard has hired fans in the past artists, right?
Who are making fan art and then they were hired on for like her stone, for example,
right? They are just constantly getting art. And so, um, sometimes people come to us
looking for art and they'll be like, can we, you know, marketing wants to use this piece
for this? And we're like, Oh, actually, that's, that's fan art. He is, he is an artist.
I worked here, but that one is not, you know, cook cannon. So that's some of the fun stuff
that we do. Um, authenticity, right? It goes back to archives are there for authenticity
and for and protecting our IP and integrity of what we do. Um, and it's right.
It's really important that we are the experts of our source.
Yeah, you know, no one else for teeth that y'all are going to have. I see mop up on the
list of museums that you can face with. Yes. So we do, um, we just did a show with
Atme in Australia, which was really cool. Our career was really heavily involved with that.
You have to send a bunch of stuff to Australia then. Yes.
So fun. That's, that's wild. Yeah. And this shows some of our, we jokingly call
archives to archives, but some of our like exchanges and, um, that we've done. Right.
Cause that's been my whole thing is that any, if, if we had more games companies that have archives,
then as things get consolidated and, and corporates do what they got to do,
and I will, I will tell you, we're all connected. We all have secret little cabal meeting. Um,
yeah. Oh, that, that goes without saying it's not like it's a secret meeting as much as it's,
that's archivists. That's, that was one of my main questions was,
do you interface, do you work with, um, other folks to figure out, you know,
professional development stuff? We do. Yeah. Cause we don't necessarily feel like we have a home. Um,
so I'm really excited that GDC is finally, um, hosting something on game preservation.
Okay. Yeah. I was there in three little, yeah, spun up to be coming in here to get a degree.
It's a little controversial. It's a little controversial. There's a, there's a narrative,
there's a narrative that I want to reclaim that's out there that's maybe put being put out from
some of your friends that game companies aren't archiving. And that is not correct. Um,
so we finally get to come together and I hope we can play together at GDC.
That is part of, yeah. Yeah. Andrew Borman's coming from, um, he's a game,
game, digital preservation director at the, um, oh my gosh, what's in museum?
Uh, the museum, a play in Rochester. He's incredible. Oh, yes. Yes. And, um, and yeah,
he's over here and he came to visit us. So he's doing, um, a standards, a game preservation
standards panel, um, or round table at GDC along with, um,
good. Oh, Garrett, I think that I'm so glad that you said that. I'm just, I'm so glad because, um,
there is a tension. Yeah. That tension was, uh, purposeful to get, to get people being like,
now, wait a minute. Yeah. Now hold on. Yeah. We need to very loudly, proudly say what we're doing.
And, you know, from my perspective, the standards for game preservation, they can't be done
by academics and nonprofits. They have to, they have to include the industry. Like, can we please
work together for this? Because if you went to Disney and told them they're not, they don't care
about their IP and stuff. They're not archiving, right? It's the same thing. It's like, yeah. It hurts.
It feels interesting. Yeah. And we're not, and we're not going to go have, um,
archives and scholars archive our IP because it's our IP and we're going to
eradicate iterate. And it is a business. Um, but we would love to work together in some capacity.
And we understand how important it is. You know, we're all dorks and we, we love this. Okay.
We love it. So GDC panels, especially using the strong as a base, uh, because they are a large
museum in Rochester. Yeah. They have access to you. They have access to the VGHF. Yeah.
Um, that could be a bridge to, um, get a stronger narrative more on the same page,
more holistic views on what archival ship and librarianship looks like in the sector.
Yes. Um, yeah. And they are hiring, uh, I was like, you know, is it salon or Scott?
It's Solon. Solon. What a cool name. Thank you. My favorite one. Listen, there is hope for you
because game archives are hiring MLS, you know, game companies are hiring ML. Yes. You know, um,
that's something that I want to prepare for just because I want this to be a role that is
normalized and not something that's like surprise. Right. You should, you should expect that a large
games corporation has space. Yeah. Um, and maybe they don't, right? And, um, the smaller games
don't, but at least we can put out some guidelines that would help everyone. You know, um, but yeah,
the people, I can tell you that work at the game, the game companies are working archiving and
trying to solve these problems are also passionate, also excited to work together. Um, also, you know,
it's fun to be at this point. Um, and we all have different backgrounds. We're not all gamers,
right? So we all have different perspectives. Um, my backgrounds in art, I've worked in the art
world for years. You know what? That comes through in a lot of the things that I've heard today. Yeah,
as art and art archivism. Yeah. So my, um, my passion has always been like helping the creators to
save their work and preserve their work, right? And to preserve their legacy, but also figuring
out what the best way to position it is for other folks to be inspired by it to take it in for
the public sphere, you know, and how to distribute it in a way. So yeah, it's, it's really fun. And
then we have someone that's a graphic designer. We have someone else that came in that's, um,
worked in entertainment archives. So yeah, there's a lot of different paths. And I think like having
that passion and it's, I mean, already your body of knowledge about this topic as a student,
I think you're, yeah, you're going to be well positioned, my friend. Oh, I appreciate it. I've
got, I still got more things I want to ask just because just little things to kind of fill in gaps.
Um, do you guys have any, uh, a weeding process or some kind of reappraisal or
deaccessioning process? Yes, we have a process, um, and an intention. Does it always happen? No,
because of course we're small. So, um, we do try to weed. We wish we had more time to weed,
but we always wish we had more time to weed. We have to deaccession. And it's almost like, um,
talking about it all goes back to advocacy. So we document anything that's deaccessioned
because there's a lot of assumptions like an executive come in and be like, oh, why they even
need all this stuff? They're probably saving, you know, why do they need all the stores?
They're probably saving stuff that isn't valuable. They're just saving everything. And like,
we're not saving everything. Here's everything we do accession. We are very strict about our
question development policy. I love that. We have, you know, you have to have a scope.
You can't do it all. Oh my God, using your weeding process as a proof of that you have the
cream of the crop in your archive is, yeah, that's amazing. Yeah, it's like, we'll show you, they
deaccession. And it's, you know, hard to let go of that stuff. But we have to be a little ruthless
with it. And it does come back to like, we're able to advocate and say we are being as responsible
and intentional as we can in our collecting, you know, right? Yep. And there's, there's not
a better place to, you know, like in, in other parts of the pipeline, if things get lost,
they just get lost. Those are down now. You at least show a paper trail and have proof of,
of things existing. No, that's, that's really cool. What else do I have? We've gone over so many
things. Oh, this was from, from someone I'm working with on the VGA Jeff stuff and, and at the
high school, they're interested in wanting to, how do you identify if an item is legally
viable to be preserved, the organization? Is there like, you own it? Yeah. That makes
their own clear. Yeah. If it's, you know, if it's any situations where you have like
license to work that you have to work around, because this comes up like from the Sony side.
Yeah, like a bunch of things that owners should change is between items. Yeah. Um,
license stuff. It's usually, we purchase it. Um, so we, if anything like that is gifted to us,
we have a data gift that, that transfers the rights to us. Okay. Yeah. That. Yep. And when you're,
is this purchasing as in your group, your department, or is this purchasing as in?
You actually have an acquisitions budget for the archive. Amazing. Yeah. Awesome.
Um, oh, and do you have like an annual report that you put together? Like, how do you better
position your team for maintaining those budgets? Oh, man. Let me look at my notes because I'm
about to give a talk on this. Um, it's the most important part because it walks that corporate
line of being like, yep, we want to show that we're probably providing value, but we're also not
expensive, but in all that stuff. Yeah. Um, gosh, where did I put these stinking notes? Okay.
I titled that business talk. That's what it is. Don't wait until you're asked for reports and
stats. So it's really important. I think, um, when you go into a business or a special library,
and you're the only archivist that they've ever had, they don't even know what to ask you for.
So you just, you know, and you can't let them, but you want to give them a steady diet of stats.
So like in a business, um, my, it's my job to advocate for our team, right? It's my boss's job
to take all the things that I give her and give them to our VP and our VP can tell a story, right?
It's almost like so. So, um, storytelling though with data. So then we're data that we're able to
collect consistently and show, show trends, all that stuff. Like it's, um, there's a big
storytelling part of archives and libraries, but in a business, you have to have stats. And so,
we've worked really hard. Um, we moved our whole team into Jira. Um, we work really hard to like
couch things as deliverables, right? Because then it gives us stats and that can feel a little
icky, right? But it's just like, this is the language this business uses everyone. Even though
we're a physical archives and, um, our library, they do sprints, right? Like we're doing sprints.
Wow. Yes. That's, I just didn't even think to ask that. Yeah. So we use your flow will
grow and shrink based on the teams, what they're doing there. Yeah. Yeah. And even, so even though
they're not engineers, they're creating tickets. They're doing sprints there. We use Jira, we use
the agile method and it is just because that we're able to be transparent in that way.
People can always go into our sprint board and see what we're working on. Um, and I'm sorry,
if, if you're not familiar with that, I'm happy to get into any of the, but it's basically like,
you're right. I am familiar with this. And that's actually probably maybe even too familiar. Um,
yes, those sprints are what you'll do in game development when, uh, you got very short timelines
that you're going to have to hit very quickly, which is you are going to be accessed in, in
you're going to be, your needs are suddenly much shorter timeline. Yeah. Yeah. And then we always
have a roadmap. Um, so we can, that our leadership has said they can see where we're going. Um,
okay. We benchmark off that roadmap. And is that also kind of line up with the development
roadmaps of Blizzard and stuff? Yeah. So, um, we revisit it annually, but it's sort of like
where, how do we, where are we going? Right? What are we doing this? Where like, how are we
growing? How are we being physically responsible? Um, do you try to line up like bigger, like your
own release launches types of things, your, your projects that are like really showy to line up
with big, showy things that happen in the company? We try. It's like a launch would result in you
being like, let's show off what we've done. Yeah. So the biggest is they apologize the museum.
So, um, it will coincide usually with a launch. So the last few museum shows, they did one on, um,
yeah, before, right? When the other was launched, an incredible, gorgeous, dark show with all the
arts, you know, beautiful. Yeah. So they do. Um, we did one for rumble. That was really fun and
like hearted and had chickens everywhere. And like, so we, we tried it. Yes. And they're so fun.
And it's really a great chance for our team to like, we hold little soft openings, right? Where
we just mingle with folks at those openings because it gives us a chance to talk to people and tell
them about what we do and why and celebrate, you know, it's like a very positive moment. It's a lot
of fun. Yeah. Okay. Okay. Um, yeah. What about like when it's between launches? Is there anything
specific that you like to do that's like, yeah, you know, you're, you know, it's in, in the time
when people are just getting to work, uh, working through prototypes and design strategies. Yeah.
So we it's not like big crunch, you know, time. Yeah. We, um, have participated in Ask an Arch
of this day. And we do like activations on campus. So, um, the last one we did,
we had booths all out around the work, um, which is this iconic statue in the middle of campus.
Just the, you got around the big org. Everyone goes around the big org and it's all the way
on the round of lunch. Well, what, what was really cool is it happened to be when the
work was getting fired. We have conservators come out and fire the work. So it was like a three
ring circus. It was amazing. We had developed a scavenger hunt where people had to go to the
library and to the museum and all these places to talk to us, um, and get a stamp and then they
entered a raffle to get free art. So just like these are, these are both corporate normal things
and library normal things. I, I've seen that they work together. So yeah, it's a fun, it's a
fun team that works freaking hard. Um, because it takes a lot, you know, we're so small, we have a
lot on our plate. So to do these sorts of outreach, um, takes a lot. But one thing that's helped us
a lot this year with anything like that, that we do is our comms team has started meeting with
us quarterly. Oh, that's amazing. Yeah. And so, um, we can plan to line that way. And they are
including us in things like, um, they have like these big battle net, um, like webcast to like,
you know, everybody in the company and where they try to like forecast what's coming and get
everyone like do stuff and excited. And so they started including us in that, including like
historical photos. They don't see you as a stuffy, like, no, things go, they see you as a party place.
Yeah. And I think, and this environment, just to be honest with you, I think people are excited
to have us as a party place, because there's a lot that isn't. Yeah. And they're excited to have
something like positive to draw stuff. You know, that's so smart. Yeah. And so it's been a very
positive growth. And I'll tell you, too, we weren't sure what happened when we were bought
by Microsoft. But, um, so far, not going with the, the impression we get is that it's valued and
they're excited and yeah, ways to utilize this more. The, the like victim of your own success
part of that is like, we still have not been invested in for years and years and years. And so,
we still have a long way to go. Um, but we're going to get there. Um, we're going to get there.
And so, you know, people like, can we see everything that you have or like, no?
No, we will cure and we never will. We will always be curating it for people. Um,
there is like a little bit of like people also love us because it's like the secret or like,
we don't let people into our storage. We don't tell them where it is. You know,
it's a lot of sensitive information in there. Um, and even what we collect, um,
in our digital archive, it's work in progress, right? It's the only place you can go to see
work and development. Um, if you're not in the game team, so we're, we're very, we have to work
really hard to like build our integrity and maintain that trust and integrity that
our policies are on accessing that, by the way, which didn't get into is, um, everything's locked
down. Um, everything's locked down by team. Everyone has their own instance, even just to make sure
like that was actually something I wanted to ask as well is access, access in, in a, in
the corporate setting. So yeah, that's, um, our engineering, how many engineers help us with that
to ensure that we're like keeping things ship, you know, um, we don't want to lose that trust.
Yep. Um, and leaks happen, right? So we're just, we're super, um,
leaks are going to happen regardless if there's a library or not, but I figure having you guys
there is actually a big help in that. Yeah. Um, everything is tracked. All downloads can be
tracked, right? So there's, you know, not that we're not that that's like, right?
Just for the security of the organization. Yeah, but for people to archive us with us,
these artists, they don't want their art out there before, you know, so, um, so we can offer
them data assurance, right? Like there's no, if there is a bad actor, we will be able to find
them very quickly. Um, and so far that we haven't had to, and it's, it's just been fine. People
are just happy to be able to access their stuff, you know, um, because it's not, that's not the
part of the job you like to, you don't want to have to do that. But also no, it's, it is another
service for the corporation that does keep everyone above board. Yeah. So our, our mission,
what is our mission preserve and protect? Let me find it. I'm gonna misquote it.
Preserve and protect and promote preserve. Yeah. I was right. It is part of the last party.
Yeah. So preserve, protect, promote, but it's like, we like to say like we protect the business.
Like that's ultimately our mission is to protect the business, but there's a lot going on,
obviously outside of that, but we have to make sure it's sort of our guiding, like, um,
intention, you know, that's so many different values. Oh, um, just one, one last question.
This one's for the, uh, the VGHF capstone part of things. Um, have you ever considered the services
of the VGHF as like an external archive? No, I'm hoping I can, yeah, I would love to connect
with them though. Um, GDC. Yeah. I think, I think them more, you know, folks that are invested in
this topic get together, work together with a better will be, you know, I want to, I want to
see their, their tone change because they've grown a lot and they have a lot of reasons to,
they had a lot of reasons to say the things they said when they did. And then they also have a lot
of reasons to, to keep growing and building up. Um, you kind of, you kind of have to be a little
bit of a heel, uh, to then later turn and see everything as a without cloudy vision.
Yeah. And like credit where credit's due, right? They've done like insanely important work.
And I feel that wasn't done. Yeah. And like for me coming from art, I always think about games
as something like film or photography, you know, historically when it first came out, it was like
lowbrow, you know, whatever for kids. Yeah. And it's like, look, this is, this is culturally
impactful. This is, there are humans behind this incredibly talented humans. It's so cool.
It's also so cool to see how art and technology and that innovation has changed and developed. And
I mean, it's something that we need to preserve for, you know, like it's just, there's value there
for study. There's value there for learning about technology. There's value there for learning
about art, you know what I mean? There's just a lot of facets. Yeah. And there's still value for
maintaining large corporate organizations while also putting out these behemoth miracles,
we call video games. Yeah. Yeah. Especially yours that don't end that live forever. The amount of,
you know, I think the biggest like sea change for me is like working with these larger than life
artists, you know, in my career. Right. Because yeah, if you're coming from the art world, those
no art is not, no, no, but most art is not, you know, has a finished date. Yes. It has a finished
date. And it's, there's like, it's about that person. And so I worked for a really famous
artist for his studio is, you know what I mean? And so he was an idea man at that point. And then
he would, you know, had other people executed, which is fine. Right. He was more of an editor,
you know. But in the video game scenario, it is so many talented people. You can't rely on one
person, one vision. Right. It just, it's really hard to have that many people to align. So I just
think it's an impressive, it's an impressive fee. And I'm like, that's part of your job. And it's so
cool. Yeah. And there is still a lot of creativity there. I know we can all get down about things
right now, but there's so much creativity that happens. And I don't know if he's me, right? It's
like, it's really cool to see. Well, Victoria, thank you so much for your time. Of course. I hope
you stay in touch. And I would love to introduce you to the team and have you come on campus and
meet everybody. Absolutely. Yeah. I would love to. Yeah. Y'all are in LA, right? We're in LA. So we're
in Irvine, which is like, oh, an Irvine. What is like, a very last house in Irvine was stripped
down your games convention. Okay. It is not a great place to visit. Right. It's just, it's not
glamorous. It's like the most stripped down astringent version of California. You could possibly find.
But I'm from the West Coast. I've lived. But you can, you can get out after you go to Orange County
and see a lot of great stuff. So, um, yeah. Yeah. Part of my religion to take the pilgrimage
to Disneyland. There you go. Yes. So we're going this weekend. Oh, nice. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Well,
best wishes and your studies. I'm very excited for your career. Thank you. Oh, this is, this is a
lot of, there's so much good information data here is all stuff that I'm both surprised, excited,
and not surprised to have heard. Um, because yeah, the stuff that like, a year and a half
into this degree, librarians are magic. Um, they just are. And so seeing you in, in Blizzard as a
place that's like, this is also magic, uh, is like, oh, God, yeah, you are doing everything that
like any, any other librarian does, but like on a scale that is so finely focused and tuned to a
community that is, that really doesn't recognize your value until they realize, oh my God, you are
magic. Like they have to, they connect that dots and now you have a communication team that's on
your side. Yeah. It's ready to like make cool things with you. And that's empowering. It's
about the right time, right? I feel like it's just the time is right. And yeah, there's a lot.
There's a lot that's sentiment that's changed, like, you know, in a short amount of time. Um,
keep in touch. Okay. Find me a LinkedIn. Thank you. When you guys invite, let me know.
Um, I can put out the word. Yeah. Yep. Two quarters. I'm just a few months away. Oh my gosh. Okay.
Well, congrats to you. Almost there. And I'm very excited to see where you land. Oh, thank you.
Thank you. I am too, because I've got a lot of folks pulling me in a lot of directions and
I've got people in the academy that are like, you want to stay? And I'm like, no. Yes. No. Yes.
What do I want? Yeah. But what a fun time. Like the point that you're at right now is like the
best, right? You have choices. You have questions at the beginning. Just the where the landscape is
right now and just hearing this from you. Like where the landscape is right now? Yeah, just right.
Future's really bright. And I just see that I see libraries and archives inside of games
companies as a way to really help save a lot of the problems that people are seeing a lot of,
you know, turnovers, layoffs and all this information loss. Because when I was at GDC in 2024,
that was all they were talking about was it sucks. It sucks. So bad. It was just how much
information gets lost. Yes. Yeah. We didn't touch on that, but yes. And that is our compelling
reason archivist too, right? You know, it's not saving substance really. It's just devastating.
Yeah. Yeah. Well, thank you so much. Of course. It's a pleasure to talk with you. And I'm very
excited to be in touch. Anytime. Yeah. Have a great rest of the day. You too. Bye.